# Rubiks Cube Solver

## Introduction
This code implements a rubik's cube solver.  In addition to simply solving the cube, this project takes into account a set of randomized costs assigned to each cubie, and attempts to solve the cube using the minimum cost.

## Installation Instructions
### Prerequisite Software
- Python interpreter - [Python](https://www.python.org/)
- NumPy - Python vector computing library - [NumPy](https://numpy.org/)

If these are already installed then you are ready to run the Rubik’s Cube Solver program. If not,
you can follow the instructions below to get started using Anaconda which installs Python
automatically and offers a simple NumPy installation procedure.

### Installing Anaconda

1. Download [Anaconda](https://www.anaconda.com/products/individual)
1. Depending on your OS and hardware, choose the appropriate installer and follow the
instructions in the installer.

### Installing NumPy

1. Start the Anaconda command prompt. (On Windows 10, this can be opened by going to
Start -> Anaconda3 -> Anaconda Prompt.)
1. Execute the command “conda install numpy”.
   1. If prompted to Proceed with installation, enter “y”.
   2. 
You are now ready to execute the Rubik’s Cube program.

## Running the Program

### Starting the program
1. Start the Anaconda command prompt. (On Windows 10, this can be opened by going to
Start -> Anaconda3 -> Anaconda Prompt.)
2. Execute the program: “py [your_path_here]/rubiks.py”
Replace [your_path_here] with the path to the Rubik’s Solver script.

### Game Setup
rubiks.py accepts interactive input from the user to set up the cube and gameplay.
1. Enter your desired game configuration when prompted:
```
0: Cube size 2; Randomized moves 4
1: Cube size 3; Randomized moves 2
2: Cube size 3; Randomized moves 3
3: Cube size 4; Randomized moves 2
4: Cube size 5; Randomized moves 2
> [enter configuration here]
```

These options configure the cube to the specified size using the specified number of randomized rotations to start.  These cube sizes and number of moves were chosen in an effort to keep the overall processing time relatively short.

2. Enter the game mode when prompted:
```
Enter mode (0-1; default is 0 - Manual gameplay):
0 - Manual gameplay
1 - Tree-based AI
> [enter mode here]
```
This value can either be:
- 0 - Manual gameplay - This mode allows the user to interact with the cube manually.
- 1 - Tree-based AI - This mode builds a search tree generated by performing valid actions and testing the state of the cube against a game over state (where for each face of the cube, all cubies on that face of the cube are the same color.)
   - This method currently implements a Uniform-Cost Search to traverse the tree.

3. Upon entering the mode, the game will begin.
   1. If in mode = 0, the user will now be prompted to enter valid actions to perform on the cube.
   2. If in mode = 1, the program will begin solving the specified cube configuration with randomized cost using a Uniform Cost Search.  The search can be cancelled at any time by entering CTRL-C.  If the search completes successfully, the user is presented with the minimum cost as found during tree traversal as well as the list of moves used to get there.  The program will then prime up those moves.  Pressing Enter/Return will perform the first move in the list.  The user can continue to press Enter/Return until all moves have been performed (the cube will now solved).

### Cube Actions
Actions are of the form:

`[row/columnIndex][cubiePlane][rotationAmountInDegrees]`, (for example, `0X90`) where:
- `[row/columnIndex]` is the row/column index you wish to move.  Valid values range from 0 to (cubeSize-1).  (For example, for a 3x3x3 cube this value can range from 0-2.)  The origin (0,0,0) is the bottom-left-front cubie. (X extends to the right, Y extends upwards, and Z extends into the display.)
- `cubiePlane` is the plane of cubies you wish to move.  All cubies with a `[cubiePlane]` location set to the `[row/columnIndex]` specified will be rotated.  As an example, the command prefix `0X` means rotate all cubies whose x value is 0.
- `[rotationAmountInDegrees]` is the rotation amount.  Valid values are (90|180|270) only.
